# SOCKS5 Support

- Status: Accepted
- Minimum Server Version: N/A

______________________________________________________________________

## Abstract

SOCKS5 is a standardized protocol for connecting to network services through a separate proxy server. It can be used for
connecting to hosts that would otherwise be unreachable from the local network by connecting to a proxy server, which
receives the intended target host's address from the client and then connects to that address.

This specification defines driver behaviour when connecting to MongoDB services through a SOCKS5 proxy.

## META

The keywords "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
"OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC 2119](https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2119.txt).

## Specification

### Terms

#### SOCKS5

The SOCKS protocol, version 5, as defined in [RFC1928](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc1928), restricted to
either no authentication or username/password authentication as defined in
[RFC1929](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc1929).

### MongoClient Configuration

#### proxyHost

To specify to the driver to connect using a SOCKS5 proxy, a connection string option of `proxyHost=host` MUST be added
to the connection string or passed through an equivalent `MongoClient` option. This option specifies a domain name or
IPv4 or IPv6 address on which a SOCKS5 proxy is listening. This option MUST only be configurable at the level of a
`MongoClient`.

#### proxyPort

To specify to the driver to connect using a SOCKS5 proxy listening on a non-default port, a connection string option of
`proxyPort=port` MUST be added to the connection string or passed through an equivalent `MongoClient` option. This
option specifies a TCP port number. The default for this option MUST be `1080`. This option MUST only be configurable at
the level of a `MongoClient`. Drivers MUST error if this option was specified and `proxyHost` was not specified.

#### proxyUsername

To specify to the driver to connect using a SOCKS5 proxy requiring username/password authentication, a connection string
option of - Code:`proxyUsername=username` MUST be added to the connection string or passed through an equivalent
`MongoClient` option. This option specifies a string of non-zero length. Drivers MUST ignore this option if it specifies
a zero-length string. Drivers MUST error if this option was specified and `proxyHost` was not specified or
`proxyPassword` was not specified.

#### proxyPassword

To specify to the driver to connect using a SOCKS5 proxy requiring username/password authentication, a connection string
option of - Code:`proxyPassword=password` MUST be added to the connection string or passed through an equivalent
`MongoClient` option. This option specifies a string of non-zero length. Drivers MUST ignore this option if it specifies
a zero-length string. Drivers MUST error if this option was specified and `proxyHost` was not specified or
`proxyUsername` was not specified.

### Connection Pooling

#### Connection Establishment

When establishing a new outgoing TCP connection, drivers MUST perform the following steps if `proxyHost` was specified:

1. Connect to the SOCKS5 proxy host, using `proxyHost` and `proxyPort` as specified.

2. Perform a SOCKS5 handshake as specified in RFC1928.

   > If `proxyUsername` and `proxyPassword` were passed, drivers MUST indicate in the handshake that both "no
   > authentication" and "username/password authentication" are supported. Otherwise, drivers MUST indicate support for
   > "no authentication" only.
   >
   > Drivers MUST NOT attempt to perform DNS A or AAAA record resolution of the destination hostname and instead pass
   > the hostname to the proxy as-is.

3. Continue with connection establishment as if the connection was one to the destination host.

Drivers MUST use the SOCKS5 proxy for connections to MongoDB services and
[client-side field-level encryption KMS servers](../client-side-encryption/client-side-encryption.md#kms-provider).

Drivers MUST NOT use the SOCKS5 proxy for connections to - Code:`mongocryptd` processes spawned for automatic
client-side field-level encryption.

Drivers MUST treat a connection failure when connecting to the SOCKS5 proxy or a SOCKS5 handshake or authentication
failure the same as a network error (e.g. `ECONNREFUSED`).

### Events

SOCKS5 proxies are fully transparent to connection monitoring events. In particular, in `CommandStartedEvent`,
`CommandSucceededEvent`, and - Code:`CommandFailedEvent`, the driver SHOULD NOT reference the SOCKS5 proxy as part of
the `connectionId` field or other fields.

### Q&A

#### Why not include DNS requests in the set of proxied network communication?

While SOCKS5 as a protocol does support UDP forwarding, using this feature has a number of downsides. Notably, only a
subset of SOCKS5 client libraries and SOCKS5 server implementations support UDP forwarding (e.g. the OpenSSH client's
dynamic forwarding feature does not). This would also considerably increase implementation complexity in drivers that do
not use DNS libraries in which the driver is in control of how the UDP packets are sent and received.

#### Why not support other proxy protocols, such as Socks4/Socks4a, HTTP Connect proxies, etc.?

SOCKS5 is a powerful, standardized and widely used proxy protocol. It is likely that almost all users which require
tunneling/proxying of some sort will be able to use it, and those who require another protocol or a more advanced setup
like proxy chaining, can work around that by using a local SOCKS5 intermediate proxy.

#### Why are the connection string parameters generic, with no explicit mention of SOCKS5?

In the case that future changes will enable drivers using other proxy protocols, keeping the option names generic allows
their re-use. In that case, another option would specify the protocol and SOCKS5 would be the implied default. However,
since there is no reason to believe that such additions will be made in the foreseeable future, no option for specifying
the proxy protocol is introduced here.

#### Why is support for authentication methods limited to no authentication and username/password authentication?

This matches the set of authentication methods most commonly implemented by SOCKS5 client libraries and thus reduces
implementation complexity for drivers. This advantage is sufficient to ignore the possible advantages that would come
with enabling other authentication methods.

### Design Rationales

### Alternative Designs

## Changelog

- 2024-09-04: Migrated from reStructuredText to Markdown.
- 2022-10-05: Remove spec front matter
